'This campaign has taken off.' Biden's blowout win in South Carolina could reshape nomination fight
Ledyard King
John Fritze
USA TODAY

WASHINGTON – Former Vice President Joe Biden had staked his presidential campaign on South Carolina, a state with a high share of black voters President Barack Obama won twelve years ago by a better than two-to-one margin.

Seconds before polls closed in the state on Saturday, it was clear the strategy paid off.

The 77-year-old, three-time presidential candidate emerged from South Carolina with such a convincing lead in exit polls that cable networks projected his victory before a single vote had been counted. The blowout was Biden's first win in a presidential primary, and though it was expected it couldn't have come at a more important moment.

"All those of you who’ve been knocked down, counted out, left behind, this is your campaign,” Biden told his supporters. "We are very much alive!"

"This campaign has taken off," he added.

COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA - FEBRUARY 29: Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden speaks at the University of South Carolina Saturday after winning the state's primary.
Biden turns to Super Tuesday in three days with a convincing enough win to quell questions – for now – about his electability after disappointing finishes in Iowa and New Hampshire. He still faces a daunting challenge next week, where Sen. Bernie Sanders has a sizable lead in California and Texas, the states with the most delegates at play.

Democratic analysts described Biden's victory as having the potential to reshape the race for the nomination. It complicated former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg's bid, several said, and had the potential to winnow the race to a battle between Biden, competing for the center lane of the party, and Sanders, pushing for the progressives.

"If this momentum holds and Biden can get his message out there, it could be a two-person race after Super Tuesday,” predicted Patrick Murray, director of the Monmouth University Polling Institute.

Biden's South Carolina win was built on support of African American voters, just as the former vice president predicted. He captured a stunning 60% of the black vote in the Palmetto State, exit polls showed. Not surprisingly, Biden focused his travel in coming days on Alabama, Virginia and Texas – states with sizable black populations.

Murray said the test of Biden's ability to rise as the main threat to Sanders will come on Tuesday. If the former vice president can hold down Sanders’ lead in California and pick up some delegates there, remain competitive in Texas, and perform well in southern states where some 300 delegates are at stake, it could change the course of the race.

"You cannot win ’em all," Sanders told supporters in South Carolina, after noting his strong finishes in Iowa, New Hampshire and Nevada.

Former Vice President Joe Biden, left, embraces Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., during a Democratic presidential primary debate, Friday, Feb. 7, 2020, hosted by ABC News, Apple News, and WMUR-TV at Saint Anselm College in Manchester, N.H. (AP Photo/Elise Amendola)
Biden’s emphatic win also spells trouble for Bloomberg, Murray said, noting that the billionaire has built a campaign on doubts about whether Biden could beat Sanders for the nomination.

"If Bloomberg's argument was 'I was getting into this race to act as a savior because there wasn't a moderate who could carry the ball,' Joe Biden has made a clear statement that he can carry the ball," Murray said.

Get the The Backstory newsletter in your inbox.
Editor-in-chief Nicole Carroll gives an inside look at the week's must reads.

Delivery: Fri
Your Email
Sanders' campaign knew first-hand that South Carolina would be a challenge. The Vermont senator had campaigned in the Palmetto State against Hillary Clinton four years ago, and got badly beaten. Still, Sanders had spent considerable time on the ground in the state working to shore up his support, particularly with African Americans.

As his campaign faltered in Iowa, where he placed fourth, and in New Hampshire, where he came in a distant fifth, Biden took to dismissing the results because of the lack of diversity in those states. South Carolina, he said as he left New Hampshire this month, would be the chance to "hear from the diverse voters whose voices must be heard."

After aggressive campaigning from Biden, Sanders and several of the candidates for African American voters, exit polls found that just over half of the state's voters were black. That represents a decline from 2016, when African Americans made up 61% of voters in the state.

Biden’s fortunes were boosted Wednesday when Democratic South Carolina Rep. James Clyburn, D-S.C. endorsed the former vice president and began crisscrossing the state with him in the final days before the primary. Clyburn, the House majority whip and the highest-ranking African American in Congress, is a landmark figure in a state.

Exit polls indicated that nearly half of Democratic primary voters in South Carolina said Clyburn’s endorsement was an "important" factor in their vote. For nearly a quarter of the state's voters, Clyburn’s backing was the most important factor for Biden.

Saturday's outcome had the potential to upend a narrative of a candidate who has struggled to raise money when he needed it and to deliver votes whenever polls opened. In other words, several analysts said, Biden needed a big win in South Carolina to have any chance of keeping his campaign alive after Super Tuesday.

He got it.

"It keeps his candidacy alive. He lives to battle on," said Terry Madonna, director of the Center for Politics and Public Affairs at Franklin & Marshall College in Pennsylvania. "But there isn’t a lot of time. The voting comes out on Tuesday, for gosh sakes."

Contributing: David Jackson